# Getting and Cleaning Data: Course Project 

## Overview

This repository is a course project for [Getting and Cleaning Data][gcd].  It contains a tidy data set for the [Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set][har], along with the R script to derive it from the raw data, and a code book describing the tidy data.

[gcd]: https://class.coursera.org/getdata-006
[har]: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

## Project Structure

The project consists of 3 parts:

* the raw data from the Human Activity Recognition project, in the [raw][raw] directory

* the data cleaning script [run_analysis.R][run]

* the tidy data resulting from cleaning in the [tidy][tidy] directory

[raw]: https://github.com/davidpierce/gettingcleaningdata/tree/master/raw/UCI%20HAR%20Dataset
[run]: https://github.com/davidpierce/gettingcleaningdata/blob/master/run_analysis.R
[tidy]: https://github.com/davidpierce/gettingcleaningdata/tree/master/tidy

## Raw Data

The raw data was generated by by the Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones project described in the reference below.

> Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

The raw data was obtained from the UCI Machine Learning Repository at the link below.

[http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)

## Data Cleaning

The raw data contains measurements for a large number of readings from Accelerometer and Gyroscope instruments in mobile phones.  These measurements were taken from 30 Subjects engaging in a suite of Activities.

### Mean and Std Variables

The first data set [har-mean-std][hms] generated by run_analysis.R consists of the mean and std variables for each measurement, extracted from the raw data.  The data is enhanced in the following ways:

* the mean and std variables for each measurement are extracted from the large set of raw variables
* activity codes are replaced with descriptive factor constants such as WALKING and SITTING
* the variable names are expanded into more readable descriptive names; see the Code Book for details
* the training and test splits are concatenated to form a single data set

### Summary Data by Subject and Activity

The second data set [har-subject-activity][hsa] generated by run_analysis.R summarizes the first data set by Subject and Activity. For each Subject and Activity, the mean of each of the variables is computed.

[hms]: https://github.com/davidpierce/gettingcleaningdata/tree/master/tidy/har_mean_std.txt
[hsa]: https://github.com/davidpierce/gettingcleaningdata/tree/master/tidy/har_subject_activity.txt

## Code Book

### Mean and Std Variables

The har-mean-std data frame has the following columns:

* Subject -- the id of the participant generating the measurements, from 1 to 30
* Activity -- the factor constant representing the activity which the subject was engaged in during the measurement, one of:
  * WALKING
  * WALKING_UPSTAIRS
  * WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
  * SITTING
  * STANDING
  * LAYING
* a number of variable columns described below.

Each of the variable columns is named in the form

> _Domain.Instrument.Filter.Axis.Statistic_

where

* _Domain_ is either Time for time series data, or Frequency for frequency data resulting from a Fast Fourier Transform
* _Instrument_ is either Accelerometer or Gyroscope
  * the instrument can also be appended with Jerk to denote that the first derivative of the time series was computed
  * if the Instrument is Accelerometer, the value is an acceleration in units of g (standard gravitational acceleration)
  * if the Instrument is Gyroscope, the value is an angular velocity in units of radians/second
* _Filter_ is either
  * Body for the body signal separated from the Gravity signal
  * Gravity for the gravity signal separated from the Body signal
* _Axis_ is one of
  * X, Y, or Z for spatial axes, or
  * Magnitude for the Euclidean norm of the measurement
* _Statistic_ is either
  * mean for the mean of the measurement
  * std for the standard deviation of the measurement

### Summary Data by Subject and Activity

The har-subject-activity data frame has the following columns:

* Subject -- as above
* Activity -- as above
* a number of variable columns as described above.

In this data frame the variables have been grouped by Subject & Activity, and the mean of the group of measurements is in the corresponding variable column.
